the highly anticipated truce between
Israel and Hamas is now underway this is
the scene live looking over Gaza from
Israel a 4-day temporary ceasefire
appears to be holding ahead of an
anticipated hostage prisoner swap later
today it follows weeks of the most
intense fighting in the Israeli Hamas
conflict Let's cross over now to our
special correspondent AA Ibrahim who's
following the story for us in Jerusalem
Aya great to see you again so the
temporary ceasefire came into effect
several hours ago are the two sides
adhering to
it we are in the very early hours of
what is very very delicate temporary
ceasefire and while there have not been
any major bombings uh rocket fire or
artillery strikes both sides uh accuse
each other of uh minor sporadic
violations but so far the ceasefire the
temporary ceasefire seems to be holding
but the situation is very uh volatile uh
it's unclear if uh Hamas has control
over all of its fighters in the Gaza
Strip and they're of course not the only
armed militant group in the strip and so
four days of a temporary ceasefire a lot
could go wrong and a lot could happen
there's also the question of what if the
military um within these four days
identifies a high value Target it will
then be confronted with the difficult
choice of going after that Target or
continuing with the ceasefire the
situation on the ground for civilians
also very volatile fears uh from the
Israeli side that civilians in the South
will want to be will want to start
heading to the north as we touched on in
that uh report um and they are warning
them with with leaflets not to do that
not to go back to the north as the
Israeli Army says that is still a very
dangerous part of the Gaza Strip uh for
civilians a how are people in Israel
feeling now that the pause and fighting
is
underway there's a it's a mixed feeling
there's of course a lot of relief and
joy um at the hostages that will
hopefully be released starting uh to
today it's an emotional roller coaster
especially for the hostage families who
are as we speak
getting phone calls waiting for phone
calls that could be the ones that tell
them that their loved ones are on their
way there's also a sense of dread that
even with this deal we're only talking
about 50 uh women and children uh out of
more than 200 hostages beli to be held
by Hamas and not everyone will be coming
back under the terms of the deal as it
stands at the moment there's also
criticism for that deal coming from a
minority in uh in Israeli Politics the
right-wing a minority but a very vocal
one that has been from the beginning
staunchly opposed to this deal claiming
that it plays into hamas's advantage and
that the or that the militant group will
be using this time to re-calibrate
regroup and that this ceasefire puts it
in a better position to attack Israel
and to delay
Israel's timeline to reach its goals
which is ultimately eradicating Hamas
completely from the Gaza Strip a this is
planned for 4 days but Israel's military
says it's already preparing for what it
says are the next stages of this war
what more can you tell us about
that well we have very clear a very
clear message from the Prime Minister uh
Benjamin Netanyahu that the war is not
over and that the fighting is continued
is expected pardon to continue once the
ceasefire uh the temporary ceasefire has
uh expired and that's because according
to Israeli officials the goal um to
eradicate Hamas completely is yet to be
um achieved up until the very beginning
of the ceasefire we saw intense uh
fighting and bombardment of the strip
and according to the IDF until the very
last minute they say they were still in
the process of destroying uh hamas's uh
tunnel Network so as far as the Israeli
side is concerned this war will continue
after the temporary ceasefire although
they have also signaled uh that they are
willing to extend the temporary
ceasefire by one day for 10 hostages so
um it's unclear what exactly will happen
but as far as the Israeli site is
concerned the war is by no means over
and their goals have not yet been
achieved thanks a DW correspondent Aya
Ibrahim in Jerusalem
well let's cross over to Bushra khi
policy lead at Oxfam thank you for
joining us on DW news tell us how much
how much Aid can your organization
deliver in these four days and and what
are you actually focusing
on I mean you have to understand that
many of our organizations actually
operate from Jerusalem uh we usually
have responded to pre escalations and
responses in Gaza through K Abu we're
not used to operating Aid operations and
this this is an unprecedented
humanitarian response um through ra uh
Supply routs have to be established
registrations have to be established for
those who don't have like oam then you
need to have agreements with partners
that are operating uh most of our
organizations operate through trusted
part partners that work inside the
community that know the communities um
they have all been affected they have
all lost their homes lost relatives and
maybe and many of them have been killed
uh in the the the in the in Israeli air
strike so um it's an extremely
challenging uh response and logistical
operation but it's also not enough the
the difference um that we're seeing is
that there's no bombardment and that you
know in addition to people being able
and children being able to play outside
people can also sleep people haven't
slept properly in the last two months
and I don't think any of us can have a
real understanding of what that means to
not be able to have a one good night
sleep so I'm hoping that Gins today have
a good night sleep without the sound of
drones and the sound of bombardment
that's constant over their heads um in
terms of the of delivering I hope that
also delivery um essential delivery in
is needed in the north and this happens
but we haven't seen any text of the
agreement so we don't know whether for
example it has been agreed that there
would be safe passage uh provided um uh
uh on both ways now we're seeing that
Israel has forbidden people to go you
know families to be able to go back to
their homes check on their homes and
even bring some clothes Winter's
approach you know people don't haven't
prepared to be displaced for this amount
of time I have family and in in yes um
no go ahead you were saying you have
family there what have they been telling
you about their is there you know the
question is is that they don't trust
Israel to respect the truth because they
didn't in
2014 um and they don't respect because
of what happened on the evacuation
routes in the last two months where
people I mean or in the last couple
weeks let's say where people were shot
at they were interrogated they were
detained they were humiliated they were
asked to walk with their arms up holding
their IDs um when evacuating to the
south I mean what are we going to see on
those routs and and my family you know
they should be able to go back home to
get some clothes maybe they have some uh
food that they had you know stocked
knowing that the war was approaching and
not knowing that be they'd be displaced
um uh my family has decided not to go uh
to the north but many people will will
have tried uh and now we've just seen
the leaflets uh uh so so what is that
agreement and why are people not being
allowed to go back to their homes um is
another you know question um the aid is
not enough it doesn't I just want to to
to to add that four days of no
bombardments does not rebuild schools it
doesn't rebuild homes it doesn't allow
women to deliver safely in a dignified
space it doesn't allow people to recover
from critical you know injuries we're
talking about tens of thousands of
critical injuries so you know for us
it's it's almost um insulting really as
a humanitarian uh uh uh uh organizations
to be asked to deliver this amount of
aid for 2.2 million people in a very
short amount of time what are we really
supposed to how are we supposed to
deliver real I just want to ask you very
quickly so so far I mean the truce has
um held up um you know we're only
several hours into it but it appears
that you know it's holding up for now um
you're saying it's not enough Aid um you
also mentioned L logistical challenges
and the reality for people on the ground
tell us a little bit more about that
logistical issue once the a does get
into Gaza how is it distributed and how
is it getting here to
people so um as for o fam we're operate
we're still operating through Partners
so we have for example a partner called
jur uh in the north that helps pregnant
women uh they will be expecting some
medical supplies to be provided to
shelters because we had pregnant women
actually delivering in shelters because
the hospitals in the north have been
non-operational um we know that there
are some humanitarian teams coming in
but we have no idea of what the size is
the UN will be um uh uh providing that
information that data later so the to
avoid confusion on the number of trucks
and how those were distributed uh mainly
those are being done through a few uh
International humanitarian organizations
um the United Nations and the Egyptian
RI Crescent of course that you know is
is is delivering a big part of his
operation um but again you can only
imagine the logistical Challenge on
damaged Roots no electricity no running
water uh it's it's the same challenges
that we've been facing in the last
couple weeks that will be met these last
four
days we'll have to leave it there thanks
Bushra khi policy lead at
Oxfam thank
you the German president has received
German Nationals who were able to leave
Gaza in the past few weeks at a private
meeting in Berlin Frank valta steinmeier
was given firsthand reports about the
situation in the territory among those
talking about their experiences were
families of Germans of pales inian
descent as well as a doctor who worked
at the alifa hospital which has been the
focus of Israeli attacks in recent days
more than 200 German Nationals have left
Gaza through the Rafa border crossing to
Egypt well for the families of those
hostages held by Hamas in Gaza the past
few weeks have been Riven with Despair
and Trauma now the troops could see some
of them safely returned at
last after weeks of waiting the families
of hostages hope their loved ones will
come home
soon I want to hope I hope hope hope
that it's going to happen we've been on
such a roller coaster for the past
certainly the past uh week but since
October 7th between Despair and Trauma
and
hope I just want to see the children
come back the Hamas terror group has
agreed to release 50 civilian Women and
Children of which 13 are to be released
in the first batch on Friday in exchange
Israel is set to release one50
Palestinian prisoners mostly females and
teenage males over the course of the
truce the deal mediated by Qatar also
includes a 4-day pause in fighting in
both the North and South of the Gaza
Strip as well as increased humanitarian
Aid even though the agreement is
considered a breakthrough both sides
have remained cautious about saying too
much before it materializes
based on current circumstances with the
start of this truce our main hope is
that this humanitarian truce will give
us all the opportunity to look into the
bigger task which is to implement a
permanent truce and Achieve long-lasting
peace efforts are being made to extend
the truths beyond the 4-day period but
Israel insists it will resume its
military operation in Gaza until it has
eradicated
Hamas
I'm now joined by amnon aan who is a
professor of international politics of
the Middle East at City University in
London welcome to DW news so tell me how
much of an accomplishment in your
opinion is this temporary ceasefire from
a political
perspective well I think first of all um
the definition I think is a temporary
pause rather than a ceasefire um I think
from a political point of view it is is
a significant achievement primarily for
Qatar on the one hand and for the United
States um on the other hand that they
have been able to uh bring Israel and
Hamas to agree uh to this deal assuming
of course that uh the first group of
hostages does U is indeed released at
4:00 uh Israeli time so just to reach
that agreement from the point of view of
those two states I think is a
significant itical
achievement now there are Moun calls
internationally for um a longer lasting
you call it a pause there it's a
temporary pause but a longer lasting
ceasefire will say um how would that
impact Israel's aim of fighting
Hamas so this is where really there is a
Divergence um the Israeli government has
repeatedly insisted that uh what we are
seeing today for the next four days at
this point is a pause rather than a
ceasefire
uh simply because uh it is concerned
that a ceasefire will uh effectively
constrain it perhaps even prevent it
from achieving uh its stated goals
namely to eliminate hamas's military
capability uh and its ability to govern
over the Gaza Strip those are the two
key aims that the Israeli government has
set for itself uh the assessment in
Israel is that a
ceasefire uh will effectively prevent
the government from achieving those
goals okay but if they're saying that
what well then how what other
alternatives are
there well I think at the moment the
Israeli government and the Israeli
military are trying to use this period
to uh regroup uh to refresh their
military operational plans we've seen
the Israeli Army spokesman um declared
that the northern Gaza Strip is still a
military zone and that's really the
background for the Israelis at the
moment preventing or trying to prevent
from gazans to return to their homes uh
but I think at the same time the
situation is very fluid at the moment uh
in two respects first of all there is
still mounting pressure in Israel to
increase the number of hostages that
will return uh from being in captivity
with Hamas to do that Hamas will try and
prolong the period of a pause and from
its point of view to try and Translate
uh uh the existing Paws into a ceasefire
so that's one set of pressures that the
Israeli government is is facing uh and
the other one of course is the
humanitarian toll that has been exacted
on the Gaza Strip especially in the
context of the war so the Israeli
government at the moment Israel will
have to strike a balance between on the
one hand achieving the Strategic goals
that it's set for itself namely
eliminating hamas's military capability
and its political ability to govern the
Gaza Strip but on the other hand uh
resisting the pressure that will Mount
to try and secure the release of more
hostages which would mean prolonging the
pauses perhaps even reaching a ceasefire
which uh seems to be something that will
stand in the way of achieving those
strategic goals from the perspective of
Hamas what does this pause mean for them
and how is it impacting
them well for Hamas the pause is is a is
a very positive development on two
fronts first of all it allows Hamas to
regroup uh uh and potentially also to
replenish uh some of its munition
assuming that it has some smuggling
routs still available uh to it but I
think on the broader strategic level uh
the main bet of Hamas to actually remain
in power is to try and withstand the
Israeli assault assuming that Israel
will now continue into the uh central
and southern part of the of the Gaza
Strip eventually bring the Israelis to
have to agree for a ceasefire
and uh uh at that point Hamas still
being if you like standing on its feet
although perhaps severely uh uh damaged
uh as long as Hamas is able to uh remain
if you like standing on its feet
politically and militarily if a
ceasefire is declared it will be in a
good position from its point of view to
restore its rule over the Gaza Strip and
it will also be able to claim that
Israel has not been able to defeat it
not withstanding the uh vast amount of
Firepower that it has used since the
beginning of the war so for Hamas
actually extending the pauses into
eventually a permanent ceasefire uh uh
and then of course increasing the
pressure by mil by civilians going back
to the northern Gaza Strip would put the
Israelis in a very difficult
position I'm Nan aan a professor of
international politics from London thank
you 8year old na'vi and threeyear old
yahel
siblings snatched by Hamas terrorists
their whole family ripped apart now they
may just becoming home for grandfather
gillad the beginning of the end of a
living
nightmare I go to hug them kiss them and
I hope they and probably they will be in
hospital in the in the first time to get
the checkup and
everything but uh I I know I don't know
I didn't think what I got to do and what
they going to say the family descended
from Holocaust Survivors are among those
Hamas hostages who hold German
citizenship last month relatives
traveled to Berlin to pressure German
officials to help bring their loved ones
home in the center of the German capital
on thday a street artist drawing
attention to their
cause the send on kingom these are all
our
children this barbaric Hamas kidnapping
shows who we are dealing
with we should not forget it and neither
should the whole
world now all the families at the heart
of this tragedy can do is
wait now a little earlier my colleague
Terry Martin spoke with shaon lifshitz
in Tel Aviv both her mother and father
were taken hostage by Hamas during the
terrorist uh attacks on October 7th her
mother was released last month but her
father is believed to still be held by
Hamas we started by asking her how her
mother yvet is
doing my mother is doing U very very
well um her heart is in under Gaza as
she say but her body is strong her mind
is strong um she's quite involved in
preparation for the return of other
hostages and she's advising from her own
experience so she's busy supporting
other families that have hostages
supporting the Ministry of Health and
other bodies within Israel as they
prepare for the return of hostages and
in particular very olderly
hostages and tell me if you would about
your father ODed he's 83 years old I
understand and and I understand he was
injured when Hamas kidnapped
him yes my father was at home with my
mom in the secure room which is the
bedroom he was shot through the metal
door and he we didn't know that until my
mother come we know that he's in Gaza we
know that he's 83 and quite frail and we
know that he we don't know if he is life
or dead 49 days into the event so I
gather you have not received any sign of
life then from your father since October
7th except what you heard from your
mother heard from your mother no we know
that he's there but we don't know if
he's dead or alive I cannot explain how
come the Red Cross or NOS other NOS
nobody is able to tell me this basic
fact I find it absolutely horrific but
I'm not the only one quite a few of us
are in this position I'm sure now the
ceasefire uh the ceasefire deal came
into Force this morning as part of the
deal around 50 hostages held by Hamas
are to be released in the coming hours
and days does that give you
hope I know many of the people on the
list today um I know them personally I
cannot wait for each person that come
back I cannot wait for the women and
children we miss them so much um our
heart is with their mothers and fathers
this is an horrendous situation some of
these children will be coming back while
the par fathers will stay behind the the
trauma is
Indescribable it crosses um through so
many circles I cannot wait to see them
each one of them is a whole life and we
are preparing to receive them and we are
doing our best we are it's very fragile
moment
it's in a scale of horrendous that we
experience since the 7th of October the
Frailty of this uh of this is very big
we don't want to speak about it till it
happens we so aware that some of us will
have some of our loved one back and
others not the trauma that will continue
because people will have to face the
knowledge that their sisters or brothers
or fathers died um they do not know much
about what is happening what has
happened since so we can't wait to see
them but this is a ray of light in the
great
Darkness now Hamas is expected at least
initially to release women and children
only are you prepared to have to wait
longer for your father's
return look we are a community we grew
together the children grow together
being part of these communities that you
have bonds that are like family if there
is a queue there then my father and
several others members of the kibuts uh
fighting to be at the end of it my
father truly believe in this young
generation and so for
he feels that he's 83 that he had a
great life that he wants those children
and their mothers and their fathers and
everyone else ahead of him we are
desperate to see him we miss him so much
but I know the kind of person he
is now we know that you're in contact
with some of the other families who are
also waiting for news about the possible
release of their loved ones you
mentioning that the uncertainty and the
waiting for all of you must be
terrible yeah I I cannot describe it our
the life of our life loved ones are in
the hands of politicians and
terrorists um in the most immediate way
um these are people that have uh caused
such horrific they have uprooted us they
have murdered us they have beheaded us
they raped us they uh slaughtered us
they have created the prgram um we were
defenseless against them um so to have
your loved one in their hands and in the
hands of a very delicate truth and a
very delicate exchange of uh terrorists
and civilians is
horrific now in kibuts near o your
parents home more than a hundred people
are thought to have been killed or
captured by Hamas on October 7th
after all that happened do you see a
future for your family in
Israel
Israel yes of course they're very rooted
there this is their home um I think that
uh my father fought for peace all his
life his parents fought for peace the
gear that the two nations would live
side by side is something that my
parents dedicated their life too and so
I think that future in Israel would also
depend on making peace and finding a way
to live side by side to sa from the
river to the sea is is not applicable we
need to find a way of living side by
side we have made peace with the Germans
after the World War II and over
generation built relationship and it's
absolutely clear that that is also
possible with uh with the Palestinian
Hamas is a horrific terrorist
organization that engaged in the most
the worst crimes against humanity
there's no peace possible with people
that train themselves to behave babies
that just went out to inflict the
maximum trauma on civilians and so
there's no peace with Kamas but with the
Palestinian people with people like the
person my mom shook hand with Absolut
absolutely we will make peace with them
we will have to find a way to live side
by
side that was shiron liit speaking to us
earlier her father is among those
hostages believed to be held by Hamas
militants in the Gaza
Strip well Israel has made clear that
despite this 4-day Tru steal the war is
not over yet earlier my colleague Terry
Martin spoke to Israeli military
spokesperson Peter Lerner and asked him
what his expectations were from this
pause in
fighting morning indeed our forces are
in defensive operational lines
regrouping and and taking the necessary
steps in accordance to the government's
instructions of course this is what we
expect to F follow through over the next
few days uh but we are um uh continuing
to be vigilant and prepared for any
eventuality like to remind you that in
recent in in not so far away history
we've had
SE spies with Hamas they've always taken
advantage of them to attack and abduct
soldiers kill soldiers so we are on on
the on the go we are prepared we're
taking the necessary steps but of course
we are abiding by the instructions of
the
government what will the Israeli
military do Colonel ler if a rocket is
fired into Israel during this ceasefire
because there are concerns that there
could be Rogue elements in Palestine
that in the Palestinian territories that
want indeed to spoil this
ceasefire so we have to be as I said we
are on defensive uh positions we're
making the necessary steps in order to
be prepared prepared for that of course
we won't tolerate attacks against us and
therefore it is as the your reporter
rightly pointed out a very fragile
situation on the ground um we are
expecting to maintain our positions and
we're and maintaining our defensive
capabilities um correctly saying we
don't want people returning to the north
precisely because this war is not over
we are in a pause an operational pause
that is um dictating the the way forward
it the operation is currently focused on
two core things first of all getting the
hostages out and maintaining conducting
the the um the release of the terrorists
and criminals coming out of Israeli
prisons and this is the focus for the
next at least days we will be prepared
in order to respond to any aggression
against
us how do you think this pause in the
fighting will impact Israel's plans to
eliminate Hamas is this going to
compromise the Israeli military's
ability to prosecute its war against
Hamas no the off the war effort will
continue the government has said so the
Prime Minister stated it explicitly our
role in this is to implement the
government policy in order to make sure
that Hamas can never wield the sword of
death against Israelis ever again um you
know they utilized and abused all of the
tools of government in order to build
their terrorist capabilities in order to
build the rockets in order to build the
tunnel system in order to build their
terrorist Army that infiltrated Israel
on the 7th of October so the the the it
doesn't change the end goal it doesn't
change the directive uh we are but Focus
that because the two goals of this war
go hand in hand we have to bring home
the hostages and this is what we're
focused on today and over the next few
days and we also make need to make sure
that Hamas never have that power again
in order to utilize it against the
people of Israel and I would add against
the people of Gaza as well now Israeli
forces I understand are warning
displaced Palestinians in Gaza those who
moved to the South telling them not to
go back to the northern part of the
strip but I understand that Hamas is
telling people indeed to go north will
Israeli soldiers stop Palestinians
trying to go north if they attempt
it I you know we've been very clear and
I think U it was part of the agreement
uh people should not be moving North we
won't permit it people should can can
continue to go south but not go to the
north there is a very very extensive as
you are aware military presence on the
ground uh the combat zone is still very
active and dangerous people should not
return to the
north that was IDF spokesperson Peter
Lerner speaking to us earlier well many
young Israeli soldiers have taken part
in the military operation against Hamas
in recent weeks and we want to shed
light on what this means for their
families so I can now speak to Karen an
Israeli American mother of four her
20-year-old son is a member of a special
combat unit in Gaza and for security
reasons we've agreed to not disclose uh
her full name or whereabouts welcome to
DW news Karen now the truce that began
this morning is expected to last for 4
days how are you feeling about this
considering it means also a break in the
fighting for your
son well um from one point I feel relief
but on the other one I feel scared
because uh every sepire
that we had before Hamas didn't stand
with this ceas fire and uh harmed our
soldiers uh even if it's a
ceasefires uh they kidna two of our
soldiers while they were in um ceasefire
so we don't know what to
expect how often have you been hearing
from your
son uh maybe once or two twice
and I I can hear from
him you you don't have much contact with
him is there is is that is there just
reasons for that behind it or is it just
that tell us a bit
more when he's uh inside Gaza you can't
contact him there is no way you can
contact him uh the last uh time that he
was out it was um last week he lost his
uh
Commander um a sniper shoot him while he
was um looking around to see what's
going on and um he took it very
seriously because he he just killed in
his
hands um so they took him for um a
little bit of um
um uh how can I say
it uh just to relax a little bit from
what was there and
um yeah I'm not sure you know I he can't
come home so I can't talk to him not all
the time he can contact me so I don't
know really what he feels and how he is
mentally um and yeah it's scary I'm not
100% yeah I understand your your
daughter will also be joining the Army
in a few days H how do you feel about
this um it's hard it's hard two kids in
the Army uh and in a war uh
it's hard this is not a usual thing that
your kids are going to the Army to serve
Israel and um both of them are in a war
I know people that uh have seven kids
and six of them are in a war six of them
are soldiers right
now you mentioned earlier that contact
with your son is um you don't have
contact with your son very often are you
regularly briefed about where he is
about how he's doing about his
experience I can tell you that you can't
sleep at
night um during the day you can't leave
your phone because you don't know if
he's gonna call if someone will call you
are scared from any uh call that it's uh
not recognized so you don't know who's
calling you it can be from the
Army um and you're afraid that someone
will knock on your door and will come
and tell you bad news about your kids so
you just uh try to think
positive um and when I was talking to
him um he was telling me a horrifying
story about what's going on there um
that with his value how he grew up he
was not able to even um imagine being in
a war in this
situation and the example is that he he
was telling me Mom I was fighting
against um Hamas that send their kids
and women in front of us in front of
them to fight us so you don't know who
to shoot and what what to do right now
because you're fighting against Hamas
but their human Shields are the kids and
the and the women so to shoot or not to
shoot and it was very hard from him at
the
beginning Karen from everything that
telling us um it sounds like a a very
difficult situation um for a parent to
be to be going through how are you
coping how do you live your day today
with this as you mentioned this this
fear of of the phone going and and bad
news
potentially so I open a project of
volunteering um we prepared the hot
meals for soldiers and for people who uh
had to leave leave their houses from
south and north and I was uh
volunteering up until two days ago when
all the donations
are over and done uh so we were just
preparing meals for the soldiers for the
people for and to do everything that you
can for your
country thank you for talking to us
today Karen on DW news Take
Care thank you thank
you